Determining how the knowledge of anatomy may Influence success or failure in clinical practice
dc.contributor.author	. Banda, S. S.	
dc.date.accessioned	2019-03-20T12:46:03Z	
dc.date.available	2019-03-20T12:46:03Z	
dc.date.issued	2007-10	
dc.description	Doctors' clinical experience can be an important source of information for content selection in developing clinically oriented anatomy courses.	en
dc.description.abstract	Doctors' clinical experience can be an important source of information for content selection in developing clinically oriented anatomy courses. Although expert opinion and personal preference have been the principal source of content for such anatomy courses, studies that actually investigate real-life experiences in clinical practice should contribute more to this enterprise. The purpose of the present study was to investigate how anatomical knowledge influenced success or failure in clinical encounters using a qualitative method. . Doctors working in tertiary, secondary, and primary care settings were invited to complete a critical incident technique questionnaire. Each participant was asked to describe a specific, particularly successful clinical encounter in which they judged that knowledge of anatomy was responsible for the successful outcome and a specific particularly unsuccessful clinical encounter in which they judged lack of knowledge of anatomy was responsible for the failure. Each narrative was analyzed and coded. The following themes of anatomical knowledge that influenced success or failure in clinical encounters were identified; knowledge that determined ability to: 1 ) locate anatomical structures topographically; 2) interpret clinical images, 3) assess patients clinically, 4) evaluate congenital anomalies; and 5) interpret laboratory reports. Although additional research is needed, the results can serve as a resource for faculty responsible for developing clinically oriented anatomy teaching curricula. Additionally, the study provides an example of a qualitative research method being used in investigating phenomenon in clinical practice.	en
dc.description.sponsorship	Office of Global AIDS/US Department of State.	en
dc.identifier.citation	Banda, S. S. (2007). Determining how the knowledge of anatomy may Influence success or failure in clinical practice. Medical Journal of Zambia. Vol. 35,4	en
dc.identifier.issn	0047-651X	
dc.identifier.uri	http://dspace.unza.zm/handle/123456789/5833	
dc.language.iso	en	en
dc.publisher	Medical journal of zambia	en
dc.relation.ispartofseries	Vol.35;No.4	
dc.subject	Education, Medical, Undergraduate	en
dc.subject	Anatomy	en
dc.subject	Knowledge	en
dc.title	Determining how the knowledge of anatomy may Influence success or failure in clinical practice	en
dc.type	Article


Feto-Maternal Outcomes of Term Assisted Breech Deliveries at the University Teaching Hospital, Lusaka, Zambia
dc.contributor.author	Vwalika, B.	
dc.contributor.author	Ahmed, Y.	
dc.contributor.author	Kasela, J.	
dc.date.accessioned	2019-06-17T11:00:16Z	
dc.date.available	2019-06-17T11:00:16Z	
dc.date.issued	2018-05	
dc.description	Determination of feto-maternal outcomes of assisted term breech deliveries at the University Teaching Hospital (UTH), Zambia.	en
dc.description.abstract	Breech presentation occurs when the fetus presents with buttocks or feet first. Globally, the incidence of breech is 3-4% at term. The safest mode of delivery for most breeches at term is still controversial despite extensive research. The aim of this study was to determine the feto-maternal outcomes of assisted term breech deliveries at the University Teaching Hospital (UTH). Methods: A cross sectional study was conducted in 73 pregnant women with term breech admitted to the labor ward that delivered vaginally. Data was collected by administering a structured questionnaire and from medical records. The Pearson's chi-squared test was used for comparison of proportions between groups. One multivariate logistic regression was used to determine associations with neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) admission and also a second one associations with type of breech. Results: The mean age of the participants was 30.6 ± 5.5 (range 18-41) years. The mean gestational age at delivery was 38.6 weeks and mean parity was 3.4, with a 5% history of previous breech. The average levels of asphyxia measured by Apgar score were 7.1 at 1 minute, 8.1 at 5 minutes and 8.6 at 10 minutes. The average fetal weight was 3200g, with 10% admissions to Neonatal intensive care unit(NICU). For the maternal outcomes, one participant had postpartum haemorrhage (PPH), and one participant had an episiotomy and none had symphysiotomy. On multivariate analysis, NICU admission was associated with lower Apgar score at 1 minute. Babies that were not admitted to NICU had 90% reduced odds for low Apgar score < 7 [Adjusted Odds Ratio (OR) = 0.10, 95% Confidence Interval (CI) = 0.004 – 0.24, P-value < 0.01. Also, on multivariate analysis, type of breech was associated with lower Agpar score at 5 minutes. Compared to footling breech, patients with extended breech had 97% reduced odds for low Apgar score < 7 (OR 0.03, 95% CI 0.004 – 0.22, p-value < 0.01). Patients with complete breech had 85% reduced odds for lower Apgar score < 7 (OR 0.15, 95% CI 0.05 – 0.44, pvalue < 0.01). Discussion and Conclusion: Feto-maternal outcomes of assisted term vaginal breech deliveries at UTH were favourable with low levels of asphyxia, neonatal admissions to NICU, and need for blood transfusion. Therefore, breech vaginal delivery at term may still be a viable option at UTH as demonstrated by this study.	en
dc.description.sponsorship	Office of Global AIDS/US Department of State.	en
dc.identifier.citation	Kasela J., Ahmed Y. and Vwalika B. (2018) Feto-Maternal Outcomes of Term Assisted Breech Deliveries at the University Teaching Hospital, Lusaka, Zambia. Medical Journal of Zambia. 45 (3) 145 - 149	en
dc.identifier.uri	http://dspace.unza.zm/handle/123456789/5959	
dc.language.iso	en	en
dc.publisher	Medical Journal of Zambia	en
dc.relation.ispartofseries	Medical Journal of Zambia. 45 (3);	
dc.subject	Breech presentation--Zambia	en
dc.subject	Fetal Presentation, Breech--Zambia	en
dc.subject	Obstetric Delivery--Zambia	en
dc.subject	Pregnancy--Zambia	en
dc.title	Feto-Maternal Outcomes of Term Assisted Breech Deliveries at the University Teaching Hospital, Lusaka, Zambia	en
dc.type	Article


Biomechanical basis of the tibial recurvation osteotomy
dc.contributor.author	Veli, L.	
dc.contributor.author	Gurbur, C.	
dc.contributor.author	Ahmet, S.	
dc.contributor.author	Bari, E.	
dc.date.accessioned	2019-03-16T14:16:43Z	
dc.date.available	2019-03-16T14:16:43Z	
dc.date.issued	1983-07	
dc.description	Tibial recurvation osteotomy which was introduced by Lok, et al more than ten years ago has been applied to over 140 patients with a high rate of success.	en
dc.description.abstract	Tibial recurvation osteotomy which was introduced by Lok, et al more than ten years ago has been applied to over 140 patients with a high rate of success. Results depend on the preoperative functional status of the different muscles of the hip and the lower extremity. The operation is primarily performed on poliomyelitis patients with loss of quadriceps function where there are no other muscles of substantial mass for surgical transfer and knee arthrodesis is not desirable. In principle it is aimed at modifying the knee joint angle so that the knee is locked at an angle of recurvation early during stance. This allows the patient to walk without the aid of his hand to stabilise the knee or without the support of a prosthetic device. Knee stabilisation is thus accomplished with minimal muscle power that is with whatever muscle function exists (Fig. 1 & 2). The technique and the complications that may arise were reported previously. The size of the recurvation angle appropriate for each patient is different and depends on available muscle strength; particularly of the gluteus maximus and the triceps muscles. Determination of the recurvation angle has until now been based on experience. In what follow is we attempt to establish objective criteria for determining the recurvation angle appropriate for each patient by following a biomechanical approach.	en
dc.description.sponsorship	Office of Global AIDS/US Department of State.	en
dc.identifier.citation	Veli, L., Gurbur, C., Ahmet, S. and Bari, E. (1983). Biomechanical basis of the tibial recurvation osteotomy. Medical Journal of Zambia. 34 (3)	en
dc.identifier.uri	http://dspace.unza.zm/handle/123456789/5817	
dc.language.iso	en	en
dc.publisher	Medical Journal of Zambia.	en
dc.relation.ispartofseries	Medical Journal of Zambia. 34 (3);	
dc.subject	Osteotomy--Zambia	en
dc.subject	Tibial recurvation osteotomy--Zambia	en
dc.subject	Tibia, osteotomy--Zambia	en
dc.title	Biomechanical basis of the tibial recurvation osteotomy	en
dc.type	Article

A Cool Storage Pot for Insulin in Rural Africa
dc.contributor.author	AIlen, S.C.	
dc.date.accessioned	2019-06-11T15:09:03Z	
dc.date.available	2019-06-11T15:09:03Z	
dc.date.issued	1982-11	
dc.description	Patients with insulin - dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) who live in the rural areas of developing countries have to contend with a number of problems which interfere with the control of their disease.	en
dc.description.abstract	Patients with insulin - dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) who live in the rural areas of developing countries have to contend with a number of problems which interfere with the control of their disease. In particular, these include infection, large distances to reach hospitals or dispensaries, loss or damage to insulin syringes and needles, and lack of refrigerators to store insulin with consequent loss of potency of insulin caused by high midday temperatures.	en
dc.description.sponsorship	Office of Global AIDS/US Department of State.	en
dc.identifier.citation	AIlen, S.C. (1982). A Cool storage pot for insulin in rural Africa. Medical Journal of Zambia. 16, (4)	en
dc.identifier.uri	http://dspace.unza.zm/handle/123456789/5949	
dc.language.iso	en	en
dc.publisher	Medical Journal of Zambia.	en
dc.relation.ispartofseries	Vol.16;No.4	
dc.subject	Insulin	en
dc.title	A Cool Storage Pot for Insulin in Rural Africa	en
dc.type	Article


The Effect of Iongterm Alcohol Exposure on Liver Choline Dehydrogenase Activity
dc.contributor.author	AIlen, S.C.	
dc.date.accessioned	2018-10-01T13:27:38Z	
dc.date.available	2018-10-01T13:27:38Z	
dc.date.issued	1980-06	
dc.description	Alcohol Exposure on Liver Choline Dehydrogenase Activity in Rats.	en
dc.description.abstract	Rats were exposed to an ethanol-containing drinking mixture for 54, 84 and 105 days. It was clown that a progressive increase in liver choline dehydrogenase activity occurred which became statistically significant at 105 days. This may be the mechanism by which ethanol increases choline requirement in mammals. Studies of this type might further our understanding of alcohol-related liver disease , and are particularly pertinent in countries such as Zambia in which alcohol consumption is high and dietary choline intake is likely to be low.	en
dc.description.sponsorship	Office of Global AIDS/US Department of State.	en
dc.identifier.citation	AIlen, S.C. (1980). The Effect of Iongterm Alcohol Exposure on Liver Choline Dehydrogenase Activity. Medical Journal of Zambia. 14 (4)	en
dc.identifier.uri	http://dspace.unza.zm/handle/123456789/5424	
dc.language.iso	en	en
dc.publisher	Medical Journal of Zambia.	en
dc.relation.ispartofseries	Medical Journal of Zambia. 14 (4);	
dc.subject	Liver,Alcohol, Ethyl---Zambia	en
dc.subject	Liver Choline Dehydrogenase---Zambia	en
dc.subject	Liver,Absolute Alcohol,Rats---Zambia	en
dc.title	The Effect of Iongterm Alcohol Exposure on Liver Choline Dehydrogenase Activity	en
dc.type	Article

The effect of longterm alcohol exposure on liver choline dehydrogenase activity
dc.contributor.author	AIlen, S.C.	
dc.date.accessioned	2019-06-20T12:26:38Z	
dc.date.available	2019-06-20T12:26:38Z	
dc.date.issued	1980-02	
dc.description	Alcohol-related liver disease.	en
dc.description.abstract	Rats were exposed to an ethanol-containing drinking mixture for 54, 84 and 105 days. It was shown that a progressive increase in liver choline dehydrogenase activity occurred which became statistically significant at 105 days. This may be the mechanism by which ethanol increases choline requirement in mammals. Studies of this type might further our understanding of alcohol-related liver disease , and are particularly pertinent in countries such as Zambia in which alcohol consumption is high and dietary choline intake is likely to be low.	en
dc.description.sponsorship	Office of Global AIDS/US Department of State.	en
dc.identifier.citation	AIlen, S.C. (1980). The effect of longterm alcohol exposure on liver choline dehydrogenase activity. Medical Journal of Zambia. 14, (4)	en
dc.identifier.uri	http://dspace.unza.zm/handle/123456789/5996	
dc.language.iso	en	en
dc.publisher	Medical Journal of Zambia.	en
dc.relation.ispartofseries	Vol.14;No.4	
dc.subject	Choline	en
dc.subject	Liver	en
dc.subject	Ethanol	en
dc.title	The effect of longterm alcohol exposure on liver choline dehydrogenase activity	en
dc.type	Article


Prevalence of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Among Sexually Abused Children of the Child Abuse Centre at the University Teaching Hospital,Zambia
dc.contributor.author	Akani, Maria A.	
dc.date.accessioned	2017-08-11T14:41:37Z	
dc.date.available	2017-08-11T14:41:37Z	
dc.date.issued	2016	
dc.description	M.MEDICINE	en
dc.description.abstract	Child Sexual Abuse (CSA) is a problem in many countries in the world including Zambia with various studies pegging the prevalence at 3 to 17% for boys and 8 to 31% for girls (Barth, Bermetz, Heim, Trelle & Tonia, 2013). The effects of CSA are both physical (genital trauma, contraction of infections, pregnancy, etc) and psychosocial (emotional dysregulation, bed wetting, regression of milestones, relational problems, poor self-esteem and other psychiatric diagnosis such as depression, eating disorders, substance misuse disorders, dissociative anxiety disorders, anxiety disorders, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), etc). However, physical effects which often heal without any further sequel are often given more attention than psychosocial effects which may last up to several years (Bernard, Peters and Makoroff, 2006; Cohen, Deblinger, Mannarino & Steer, 2004; Fossati, Madeddu, & Maffei, 1999; Hevey & Kenward, 1989; Maniglio, R., 2009). Aim: This study was done to determine the prevalence of posttraumatic stress disorder among sexually abused children from the child sexual abuse centre at University Teaching Hospital and to describe relevant aspects of it. Materials and Methods: Children aged 4 to 15 years were recruited at their one month reviews. Demographic details and abuse characteristics were obtained from the centre records while the Child PTSD Symptom Scale (CPSS) was used to assess for PTSD (Foa, Johnson, Feeny & Treadwell, 1999). Two way analysis and multivariate analysis were used to analyse association. Results and Discussion: There were 192 participants in the study with only 3 boys. Teenagers constituted almost half the study population with median age = 13, mean age = 11, mean age for boys = 11. Ninety eight percent of the referrals were from the Police. All the abusers were males with neighbours, boyfriends and non-relative adults constituting over 50% of the abusers in the study. Sexual abuse by boyfriends was significantly high although the abuse by the neighbour scored the highest. Penile penetration was the main feature of the abuse with only one in twenty abusers being reported to have used condoms. Physical Force was the main mode of engagement used on the children. The prevalence of PTSD was 33.3 % with 9 % of vi the children presenting with severe impairment. There was an association between PTSD diagnosis and functional impairment and re-experiencing and hyper-arousal cluster of PTSD symptoms. There was no association between the type of coercion used (force, playful coaxing, etc) to lure the children and the development of PTSD. Conclusion and Recommendations: Prevalence of PTSD is high among sexually abused children. Most of the sexual abuse involves unprotected penetrative sex. The police should be included in planned care for CSA victims.	en
dc.identifier.uri	http://dspace.unza.zm/handle/123456789/4805	
dc.language.iso	en	en
dc.publisher	University of Zambia	en
dc.subject	Cognitive therapy for children--Case studies.	en
dc.subject	Child sexual abuse--Psychological aspects.	en
dc.subject	Sexually abused children--Rehabilitation.	en
dc.title	Prevalence of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Among Sexually Abused Children of the Child Abuse Centre at the University Teaching Hospital,Zambia	en
dc.type	Thesis


Clinical and epidemiological features of Salmonella Septicaemia at the University Teaching Hospital,Lusaka
dc.contributor.author	Ali, Ali Salim	
dc.date.accessioned	2012-06-18T10:35:41Z	
dc.date.available	2012-06-18T10:35:41Z	
dc.date.issued	2012-06-18	
dc.description.abstract	SETTINGS Study was conducted at the University Teaching Hospital medical wards. 98 Patients with positive blood cultures for Salmonella spp. were studied. OBJECTIVES To describe clinical and epidemiological features of Salmonella septicaemia at the University Teaching Hospital, Lusaka. METHODS Consecutive patients who met the inclusion criteria were recruited into the study. All patients were clinically evaluated.Bloods cultures, slides for malaria parasite, urea and electrolytes, HIV test and Haemoglobin, were done to all patients using approved routinely used methods at University Teaching Hospital. Salmonella serogrouping and antibiotic sensitivity test were done at the University of Colorado USA. RESULTS Greater number of the patients was between 23 years and 39 years of age, with median of 32 years. Salmonella typhimurium is the commonest isolate (60%). Salmonella munchen and S.heidelberg, which were recently isolated for the first time in Zambia, were also isolated in this study (2%) each). Salmonella isolates are 100%) sensitive to Ceftazidime, Ciprofloxacin and Ceftriaxone. Chlromphenicol intermediate sensitive by 96%. The rate of HIV among Salmonella septicaemia patient was found to be 15.5%. 75% of these patients had major co-existing disease conditions such as, pulmonary tuberculosis (35.7%)), Meningitis (20.4%)), Kaposis sarcoma (7.1%o), etc. CONCLUSION Clinical and epidemiological features of the Salmonella septicaemia in our patients could not be determined due to co-existence of major disease conditions, which confound the clinical manifestation of Salmonella septicaemia.	en_US
dc.identifier.uri	http://dspace.unza.zm/handle/123456789/1308	
dc.language.iso	en	en_US
dc.subject	Epidemiology-Zambia	en_US
dc.title	Clinical and epidemiological features of Salmonella Septicaemia at the University Teaching Hospital,Lusaka	en_US
dc.type	Thesis

Evaluation of the Quality of Artemether/Lumefantrine, Sulphadoxine/Pyrimethamine and Quinine Sulphate Tablets in Public and private Health Institutions in Lusaka District
dc.contributor.author	Alutuli, Luke	
dc.date.accessioned	2012-01-19T08:32:50Z	
dc.date.available	2012-01-19T08:32:50Z	
dc.date.issued	2012-01-19	
dc.description.abstract	The problem of counterfeiting of drugs presents an enormous public health challenge. No area of the world is unaffected, but mounting evidence shows that the problem is disproportionately severe in developing and emerging market countries, which also have a high burden of infectious diseases such as tuberculosis and malaria. Since no area of the world is unaffected, it is obvious that Zambia is no spared, although there is almost complete absence of both qualitative and quantitative data on the prevalence of counterfeit and substandard drugs in the country. The purpose of the study was to evaluate the quality of Artemether/Lumefantrine, Sulphadoxine/Pyrimethamine and Quinine tablets in selected Public and Private Health Institutions in Lusaka District. A cross sectional design study was conducted using quantitative research method. 20 Public and Private Health Institutions were randomly selected, and 430 tablets of each drug type were selected using convenient sampling method. The quality of the drugs was ascertained using the GPHF-Minilab at Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority, and data were entered in Epidata and analysed, and presented in cross tabulations. This study provides objective evidence to answer speculations whether or not substandard antimalarial drugs exist in Lusaka. The study has revealed that substandard antimalarial drugs exist in Lusaka as evidenced by the 6.98% of Sulphadoxine/Pyrimethamine tablets that failed to comply with the required active ingredients and their percentage content. The substandard drugs could not have been counterfeited but could have been as a result of non adherence to Good Manufacturing Practice. The study shows that the antimalarial drugs conformed to the official monographs requirements in ascertaining the quality of the pharmaceutical products in terms of packaging and labelling. The existence of substandard antimalarial drugs in Lusaka, and their final use in prevention and treatment of malaria could have detrimental clinical consequences and implications to the patient, as substandard drugs unsafe and inefficacious. The revelation of the existence of substandard drugs by this study poses a challenge to the Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority to enhance its Post-marketing surveillance programme to ensure and assure constant quality monitoring of drugs that are found on the Zambian market, as quality, safety and efficacy are the tenets of every pharmaceutical product.	en_US
dc.identifier.uri	http://dspace.unza.zm/handle/123456789/998	
dc.language.iso	en	en_US
dc.subject	Artemether	en_US
dc.subject	Anti-Tuberculosis Drugs	en_US
dc.subject	Sulphadoxine/Pyrimethamine	en_US
dc.subject	Quinine Sulphate Tablets	en_US
dc.title	Evaluation of the Quality of Artemether/Lumefantrine, Sulphadoxine/Pyrimethamine and Quinine Sulphate Tablets in Public and private Health Institutions in Lusaka District	en_US
dc.type	Thesis

Effects of intervention on feeding practices in the intensive care unit at the University Teaching Hospital, Lusaka. Zambia
dc.contributor.author	Amadi, Beatrice Chifwelu	
dc.date.accessioned	2012-06-15T10:47:58Z	
dc.date.available	2012-06-15T10:47:58Z	
dc.date.issued	2012-06-15	
dc.description.abstract	Preintervention Knowledge, Attitudes and Practices with respect to breastfeeding among Healthworkers from Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) at the University Teaching Hospital (UTH) and mothers with babies admitted to NICU was carried out. The Healthworkers and mothers were given questionnaires to answer on Knowledge, Attitudes and Practices regarding breastfeeding. A two weeks' Lactation Management Course for the Healthworkers was conducted. After 7 weeks the same questionnaires were given to the Healthworkers and a different group of mothers whose babies were admitted in NICU during this period.There was improvement in the Know!edge, Attitudes and Practices of Healthworkers after being trained. This improvement was reflected in the equally improved Knowledge, Attitudes and Practices of the new group of mothers who were in contact with trained Healthworkers. NICU practices not supporting breastfeeding have been changed, mothers are now allowed m NICU to breastfeed or feed their babies expressed breastmilk by cup and spoon. No bottles are used. There is also reduced use of formula milk which is given only to those babies whom mothers are not available. Recommendations have been made regarding what should be done next.	en_US
dc.identifier.uri	http://dspace.unza.zm/handle/123456789/1303	
dc.language.iso	en	en_US
dc.subject	Breast feeding	en_US
dc.title	Effects of intervention on feeding practices in the intensive care unit at the University Teaching Hospital, Lusaka. Zambia	en_US
dc.type	Thesis

Prospective study of empyema thoracis at the University Teaching Hospital, Lusaka, Zambia
dc.contributor.author	Amadi, Waleruchi E	
dc.date.accessioned	2012-07-25T13:33:49Z	
dc.date.available	2012-07-25T13:33:49Z	
dc.date.issued	2012-07-25	
dc.identifier.uri	http://dspace.unza.zm/handle/123456789/1482	
dc.language.iso	en	en_US
dc.subject	Empyema(thoracis)--University Teaching Hospital --Zambia	en_US
dc.subject	AIDS-related complex(chest pains)--Zambia	en_US
dc.title	Prospective study of empyema thoracis at the University Teaching Hospital, Lusaka, Zambia	en_US
dc.type	Thesis

Uptake of intermittent preventive treatment for malaria during pregnancy with sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine(IPTP-SP)among postpartum women in Zomba district,Malawi: a cross-sectionals study
dc.contributor.author	Azizi, Chifundo Steven	
dc.date.accessioned	2019-01-30T10:48:30Z	
dc.date.available	2019-01-30T10:48:30Z	
dc.date.issued	2017	
dc.description	Thesis	en
dc.description.abstract	Malaria in pregnancy causes adverse birth outcomes. Intermittent preventive treatment of malaria during pregnancy with sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine (IPTp-SP) is recommended as a chemoprevention therapy. Despite the effectiveness of the intervention, Zomba district has below national average uptake of 43% of pregnant women who took at least two doses of SP. The study was conducted to assess determinants of IPTp-SP uptake during pregnancy among postpartum women in Zomba district. The study used a cross-sectional survey with simple random sampling in selecting two public health facilities (HFs) from two strata (urban and rural). One HF was selected from each stratum. Study participants were selected by using exit poll method from HFs. A total of 463 postpartum women were interviewed using structured questionnaire from the two HFs. Univariate and multiple binary logistic regression was employed in data analysis. Out of all the enrolled participants (n=463), 92% women had complete information for analysis. Of these, (n=426)women, 127 (29.8%, 95% CI: 25.6-34.3) received three (optimal) or more doses of SP, 299 (70.2%, 95% CI: 65.7-74.4) received two or less doses (poor uptake or suboptimal). Women receiving SP from rural HF were less likely to get at least three doses of SP than urban women, (AOR=0.31, 95% CI 0.13-0.70); Others less likely were those with three or few antenatal care (ANC) visits versus four or more visits (AOR=0.29, 95% CI 0.18-0.48); not taking SP under direct observation therapy (DOT) (AOR=0.18, 95% CI (0.05-0.63). The prevalence of low birth was 6.5% (95% CI 4.0-10.3, n=248) and there was no evidence of an association between poor IPTp-SP uptake and low birth weight even after adjusting for other variables, (AOR=0.59, 95% CI 0.19-1.78). There is low utilisation of SP in this population and this seems to be associated with the number of ANC visits, use of DOTs and distance to health facility. These determinants may therefore be important in shaping interventions aimed at increasing the uptake of IPTp in this district. In addition, the rural urban differential suggests the need for further research to understand the barriers and enablers of uptake in each context in order to improve the health of the community.	en
dc.identifier.uri	http://dspace.unza.zm/handle/123456789/5718	
dc.language.iso	en	en
dc.publisher	The University of Zambia	en
dc.subject	Malaria--Pregnancy--Malawi	en
dc.subject	Postpartum women--Sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine(IPTp-SP)--Chemoprevention therapy--Zambia	en
dc.title	Uptake of intermittent preventive treatment for malaria during pregnancy with sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine(IPTP-SP)among postpartum women in Zomba district,Malawi: a cross-sectionals study	en
dc.type	Thesis

Prevalence of schistosomiasis in Mbala district, Northern province, Zambia.
dc.contributor.author	Banda, Aaron	
dc.date.accessioned	2013-02-15T11:05:01Z	
dc.date.available	2013-02-15T11:05:01Z	
dc.date.issued	2013-02-15	
dc.description.abstract	ABSTRACT Schistosomiasis is a tropical disease caused by blood flukes of the genus Schistosome. According to data reviewed, Mbala District has been experiencing a number of people suffering from Bilharzia from 1999 to 2004(150-214). The important aspects of Bilharzia pathology are the complications of the disease such as cancer of the bladder and anaemia .Infected children become weaker and the school performance is reduced. It was against this background that the study was aimed at identifying the reasons why there is a high prevalence of bilharzias among school going children in Mbala. It was hoped that the findings of the study would be used in the formulation of policies and strategies to reduce Schistosomiasis prevalence. A non experimental, cross sectional, descriptive study was used. A simple random sampling method was used and a sample of 50 respondents was selected. Respondents were selected from 4 rural Basic Schools namely, Chianga, Ndundundu, Uningi, and St. Pauls. Data was collected using a structured interview schedule in the month September 2005.Analysis of data was manually and findings were presented in frequency tables and cross tables. The specific objectives were to asses knowledge levels on Schistosomiasis, identify recreational and occupational practices, and asses the level of compliance to Schistosomiasis treatment among school going children. The study reviewed that the level of knowledge on Schistosomiasis increased with increasing level of education. It was also found that most of the respondents (50%) had low knowledge levels on Schistosomiasis. This was attributed to the fact that pupils in lower primary grades (1-4) did not learn about Bilharzia in class. The study further reviewed that (94%) of' the respondent's recreational and occupational Practices were poor. This was attributed to poor socio-economic conditions of most people in Mbala .The study also reviewed that, all the respondents (100%) who passed blood in urine had poor compliance to treatment. This was attributed to the fact that bilharzia presents with light infection and less serious manifestations. This therefore implies that there is need for authorities to recognize Bilharzia as one of the priority problems of public health and devise strategies such as mass health education on bilharzia. The other recommendation is that there is need for further research on the aspects of snail species to determine the contact sites and come up with an approach to control snail population.	en_US
dc.identifier.uri	http://dspace.unza.zm/handle/123456789/2069	
dc.language.iso	en	en_US
dc.subject	children - diseases - mbala	en_US
dc.subject	schistomiasis - prevalence - mbala.	en_US
dc.subject	schistosoma in children - prevalence - mbala.|	en_US
dc.title	Prevalence of schistosomiasis in Mbala district, Northern province, Zambia.	en_US
dc.type	Other

Factors contributing to adolescent pregnancies at Hillside and Chipata day secondary schools in Chipata district
dc.contributor.author	Banda, Alidonnie	
dc.date.accessioned	2018-07-11T09:21:38Z	
dc.date.available	2018-07-11T09:21:38Z	
dc.date.issued	2017	
dc.description	THESIS MSC(NURSING	en
dc.description.abstract	Adolescent pregnancy is a worldwide problem which has assumed endemic proportions among the teenagers especially in the poorer nations. This problem is a multifaceted problem as it involves social, political, cultural, educational and economical factors. Zambia’s maternal mortality rate and infant mortality rate according to Zambia Demographic Health Survey for 2013-2014 are 398/ 100 000 and 66/ 1 000 respectively. According to Panday et al 2009, because of the physiological risks associated with early childbirth, and the risk to the overall wellbeing of the mother and their children, decreasing adolescent fertility is identified as one of the indicators to monitor progress in achieving the millennium development goals four and five. A descriptive cross section study design was used. Data was collected from February to April 2015 from participants who meet the enrolment criteria. A self administered questionnaire will be used to obtain socio-demographic data and knowledge on pregnancy. The data collected were entered directly into data editor of SSPS version 22.0 software statistical package so as to obtain a data set. Statistical data was presented using frequency tables, cross tabulation tables, histograms, pie charts and graphs. Chi square test was used for statistical significance. A p-value of 0.05% and odds ratio (95% CI) was set. The findings of the study showed that marital status, having a boy friend, having unprotected sexual intercourse and not accessing family planning services were strongly associated with factors contributing to adolescent pregnancies in these two schools. The findings of the study were presented to the School of Nursing Sciences, The Ministry of Education, The University of Zambia library, The Ministry of Health and participants. The findings will then be published in the Peer reviewed journal.	en
dc.identifier.uri	http://dspace.unza.zm/handle/123456789/5239	
dc.language.iso	en	en
dc.publisher	The University of Zambia	en
dc.subject	Teenage--Pregnancies--Secondary school pupils--Zambia	en
dc.title	Factors contributing to adolescent pregnancies at Hillside and Chipata day secondary schools in Chipata district	en
dc.type	Thesis

Factors influencing indoor residual spraying in Lusaka district's Mtendere, Kanyama and Matero Compounds
dc.contributor.author	Banda, Anne	
dc.date.accessioned	2011-07-08T14:30:20Z	
dc.date.available	2011-07-08T14:30:20Z	
dc.date.issued	2011-07-08	
dc.description.abstract	Monitoring and evaluation assessments of the IRS programmes reveal an inability to meet set IRS coverage targets. The purpose of this was to determine the factors that influence the low IRS coverage. A cross sectional household study was carried out in Lusaka District’s Mtendere, Kanyama and Matero Compounds. Data was collected from heads of households by an interactive method using a scheduled questionnaire.295 households were randomly selected. The sample size was calculated for the coverage rate of 78% plus or minus 5% and at 95% confidence interval. The 78% was derived from the IRS coverage of the 2006/2007 season during which 85% of eligible structures in Lusaka District were targeted Using Epi Info Version 6.0 the Yates corrected P values were calculated using chi square and used to determine relationships and associations between variables. The study established that IRS Coverage was 48.6% which was less than the targeted 85%. There was 36% coverage in Kanyama, 52.2% in Matero and 62% in Mtendere Compounds. Most of the houses (60%) were sprayed during the peak malaria season which is also the rainy season and that Willingness to have IRS had influence on IRS Coverage while community participation in IRS was nonexistent. Significant relationships were found between IRS Coverage and study area (P value<0.001), knowledge of the institution that carried out IRS (P value <0.001) and access to IRS related IEC (P value 0.042). The study found a significant relationship between the respondent’s willingness to have IRS: ability to remember what was heard and/or seen during IRS related IEC (P value 0.040), knowledge of the institution which sprayed (P value <0.001) and benefits anticipated from IRS (<0.001). 66.3% of the respondents own and use mosquito nets of which 45% were untreated, 20% were long lasting nets and 35% were locally treated nets. 62.3% of the respondents whose houses were not sprayed indicated that the sprayers did not come to their houses. Of the 143 houses that were sprayed 2.1% altered the walls after IRS, 34.3% reacted negatively to IRS, sprayers left pesticides on the floor in 7% of the houses there houses. The Ministry of Health (MOH) and National Malaria Control Centre (NMCC) shall find these results useful in planning for the IRS as it highlights areas that need attention. The policy makers ought to continue informing the communities regarding IRS and involving them in IRS activities as well as to monitor the activities of the sprayers whilst carrying out IRS	en_US
dc.identifier.uri	http://dspace.unza.zm/handle/123456789/558	
dc.language.iso	en	en_US
dc.subject	Mosquito control	en_US
dc.title	Factors influencing indoor residual spraying in Lusaka district's Mtendere, Kanyama and Matero Compounds	en_US
dc.type	Thesis

A study to determine the attitudes of nurses on post exposure prophylaxis at Chipata General Hospital
dc.contributor.author	Banda, Beatrice May	
dc.date.accessioned	2013-02-15T11:04:33Z	
dc.date.available	2013-02-15T11:04:33Z	
dc.date.issued	2013-02-15	
dc.description	A research study submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements of the wards of a Bachelor of Science in Nursing Degree at the University of Zambia.	en_US
dc.description.abstract	ABSTRACT Post Exposure Prophylaxis (PEP) is an important infection prevention method in relation to combating HIV/AIDS pandemic which has affected the whole world, including Zambia. Research studies are being done to find solutions to the effects of HIV/AIDS on the nursing profession in order to identify the needs of nurses and midwives in responding to HIV/AIDS. The aim of this study is to determine the attitudes of nurses on post exposure prophylaxis at Chipata General Hospital, Zambia. Literature review was obtained from studies conducted globally, regionally and nationally. Literature has indicated that it is necessary to have infection prevention measures implemented in the health care setting for the safety of the care givers so that in turn the society at large accesses quality health care services. Assessing the nurses' attitude on PEP is necessary because it helps understand why nurses may not be accessing this service even when it is available. A descriptive non interventional (non experimental) study was conducted at Chipata General Hospital between 1st to 30th September, 2007. The study population included all the nurses at the institution. A sample comprising 50 respondents was selected using stratified random sampling. A self administered questionnaire was used to collect data. Quantitative and qualitative data was analysed manually using a data master sheet and scientific calculator. Data was presented in the form of frequency tables, pie charts and bar charts. Cross tabulation were used to determine the relationship between variables. The study revealed that majority 35 (70%) out of 50 respondents had negative attitude towards PEP while 15 (30%) of the respondents had a positive attitude. This indicated the fact that the nurses's attitude affected their knowledge either in the positive or negative way. Furthermore, negative attitude may also lead to loss of knowledge that one had on PEP. xiv The literature also revealed that nurses were knowledgeable on PEP but their access was not according to expectations. This attitude was attributed to length in service, professional qualification, orientation to PEP, availability of PEP literature in all the departments, support from nurse managers and confidentiality practices among nurses. The major recommendations are:- The Ministry of Health should work in collaboration with the various partners NGOs dealing in issues of HIV/AIDS focussing mainly on training programmes and refresher courses for health personnel with emphasis on PEP. The nursing services department needs to capitalise on holding clinical meetings so that nurses can continuously learn and adapt to the changes that occur in the health sector in terms of new technology, new information and knowledge as well as trends in disease patterns. This in turn will improve the nurses attitude towards their continuing education. The infection prevention committee must train PEP focal persons at departmental level. These will be trained in PEP and how to use the PEP test kit to be able to render PEP services at departmental level immediately a health worker is exposed to HIV infection. xv	en_US
dc.description.sponsorship	Ministry of Health.	en_US
dc.identifier.uri	http://dspace.unza.zm/handle/123456789/2067	
dc.language.iso	en	en_US
dc.subject	HIV infection -- prevention -- Chipata	en_US
dc.subject	Nurse practioners -- attitudes -- Chipata	en_US
dc.subject	HIV infection -- post exposure prophylaxis -- Chipata	en_US
dc.title	A study to determine the attitudes of nurses on post exposure prophylaxis at Chipata General Hospital


Factors associated with utilization of labour and delivery health services by women in Lusaka district facilities
dc.contributor.author	Banda, Ngala Jeane	
dc.date.accessioned	2017-08-22T10:37:00Z	
dc.date.available	2017-08-22T10:37:00Z	
dc.date.issued	2016	
dc.description	MSC NURSING	en
dc.description.abstract	ABSTRACT This study focused on women’s utilization of labour and delivery health services in Lusaka urban district health facilities. Utilization of labour and delivery health services can ensure that women are attended to by skilled personnel and link them to referral system in case of any complications. However, delivering in health facilities is still challenging in Sub-Saharan region including Zambia, despite the importance of institutional deliveries in preventing maternal and neonatal morbidity and mortality. The aim of this study was to determine factors that are associated with utilization of Labor and delivery health services by women in Lusaka district health facilities. This cross sectional study was carried out using both qualitative and quantitative approach to collect data from three hundred and seventy three postnatal women (15-45years) who had given birth six(6) months and below prior data collection. Stratified random sampling was used to select six (6) study sites, systematic sampling was used to select three hundred and forty three (343) respondents for quantitative data while purposive sampling was used to select thirty (30) respondents for qualitative data respectively. Three Focus Group Discussions (FGDs) were conducted in three health centers namely Kanyama, Chawama and George health facilities. Interview schedules and FGDs guide were used to collect data. Data from interview schedules were entered and analyzed using Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) version 22.0 for windows and presented using frequency tables, pie charts, and histogram and cross tabulations. The Chi-square test was used to test the association among variables and multivariate logistic regression analysis was carried out to predict the outcome. Statistical significance was set at 0.05 and strength of statistical association was assessed by odds ratio (OR) with 95% confidence interval. Content analysis was used to analyse data from the Focus Group Discussions and the most use full information that merged from the discussion was selected and used to illustrate the main points. The results showed utilization levels were at 89% while non-utilization stood at 11%. After multivariate logistic regression, maternal education (Odds=3.5, CI, 1.046-11.861, P-value=0.042), Antenatal care visits (Odds=9.8, CI, 1.248-76.769, P-value=0.030) and transport affordability (Odds=4.7, CI-1.707-12.975, P-value=0.003) were factors which were significantly associated with utilization of labour and delivery health services in Lusaka district health facilities. In this study, utilization of labour and delivery health services was optimal while non-utilization stood at 11%. Therefore, the study recommends that there is need for Ministry of Education to support women’s education beyond primary education and the health providers to continuously sensitize women on importance of early antenatal care booking and complete the four recommended visits because during antenatal care, women are given information on birth preparedness and on benefits of utilising labour and delivery health services. For further research, there is need to conduct a community based study on home deliveries so that more information from women who don’t register home births is obtained. Key words: Utilization, Labour, Delivery, Health facilities, Women.	en
dc.identifier.uri	http://dspace.unza.zm/handle/123456789/4866	
dc.language.iso	en	en
dc.publisher	University of Zambia	en
dc.subject	Maternal health services.	en
dc.title	Factors associated with utilization of labour and delivery health services by women in Lusaka district facilities	en
dc.type	Thesis